---
layout: "post"
title: "Welcome to my blog!"
author: "Varun"
categories: [General, Sets]
math: "true"
---

Hi guys, so as I've put on the [About][about] page, this is mostly going to be about me and things in maths I think are important. 

Fair warning, a lot of it will be stuff I don't necessarily understand that well, but I'll obviously be as honest as possible. 

To start, I thought I'd talk a little bit about sets, they're incredibly important (you might even say [the most important][sets]) constructions underpinning a lot of mathematics. This is partly for revision's sake but mostly just as a good way to start getting familiar with blogging about maths. 

So ... what is a set? At heart, it's just a collection of distinct objects. These can be physical objects but they can also be concepts such as numbers or colours. 

Sets tend to be denoted by capital letters \\(A, B\\) etc. So I might say \\(A = \\{ \color{red}{\text{red}}, \; \color{cyan}{\text{cyan}}, \; \color{green}{\text{green}} \\} \\) or \\(B = \\{2, 4, 6\\} \\).

The classic question in maths, once you have an object, is: how do we get new ones? For sets, it turns out there are a few ways to do this. Some of the important ones are subsets, intersections and unions. To keep this concrete, let's _set (get it?)_ $A = \\{ \color{red}{\text{red}}, \; \color{cyan}{\text{cyan}}, \; \color{green}{\text{green}} \\}$ and define \\(B = \\{ \text{white}, \; \color{cyan}{\text{cyan}}, \; \color{orange}{\text{orange}} \\} \\).

An example of a _subset_ of A would be \\(C = \\{ \color{cyan}{\text{cyan}}, \; \color{green}{\text{green}} \\} \\). We write \\(C \subset A\\) in general. 

The _intersection_ of \\(A\\) and \\(B\\) is 

\\[A \cap B = \\{x \in A \; \text{and} \; x \in B\\} \\]

where \\(x\\) represents a general element. In our example, this translates to \\(A \cap B = \\{\color{cyan}{\text{cyan}}\\} \\) as this is the only common element to the two sets. 

The _union_ of \\(A\\) and \\(B\\) is 

\\[ A \cup B = \\{ x \in A \; \text{or} \; x \in B \\} \\]

In our example, this translates to \\(A \cup B = \\{\color{red}{\text{red}}, \; \color{cyan}{\text{cyan}}, \; \color{green}{\text{green}}, 
\; \color{white}{\text{white}}, \color{orange}{\text{orange}} \\} \\).

The last thing we'll talk about on this post is special way of creating new sets from old ones, called the _Cartesian product_. This looks like

\\[ A \times B = \\{(a, b) : a \in A, b \in B \\} \\]

Drawing on our example \\(A\\) and \\(B\\) above, some elements of \\(A \times B\\) in this case would be \\( (\color{red}{\text{red}}, \color{orange}{\text{orange}})\\) and \\((\color{cyan}{\text{cyan}}, \color{white}{\text{white}}) \\). 

As a last random bit, I want to talk about [Russell's paradox][axioms] (named for Bertrand Russell) that formalised a serious problem within set theory as we might think of it intuitively. We said earlier that the elements of a set could be numbers, colours, etc. They can also be sets. 

Counter-intuitively, a set can contain itself. Yeah, I know, makes no sense, but it will if you think of it like this: Everything either is or isn't a potato. Consider the set of things that are NOT potatoes. By definition, the set isn't a potato - it's a set. So it must be inside itself. (sneaky? Yes. Incorrect? No.)

Now we make another jump, and consider the set containing _sets that do not contain themselves._ We can call this $$S$$. Assume $$S$$ contains itself. Then $$S$$ is one of the $$x$$ such that $$x$$ does not contain itself, the definition of $$S$$. So if $$S$$ contains itself, it doesn't. Similarly, if it doesn't, it does. Sounds great, right?

This might sound like a small problem but it goes to show that implicit assumptions often lead to mathematical (and other) issues. In fact this paradox helped galvanise several attempts to [axiomatise set theory in order to avoid such difficulties][axioms]. Ideally I'll write something on those sometime, but for that I actually have to learn some set theory first :)

Till next time.  





[about]: /about/
[sets]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set_theory
[axioms]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russell%27s_paradox
